when you think of an emulator you
probably think of something that allows
you to play copies of games that you of
course acquired in a totally legit way
on a different system so think a game
boy emulator for your smartphone or an
n64 emulator for your desktop pc and the
fact that you need a special program to
run these games makes intuitive sense
right you're trying to run a game design
for a completely different piece of
hardware but hold on because you need
emulators for some of your old pc games
too even if you're trying to play them
on another pc i mean sure modern
hardware is quite a bit faster than
whatever you're using 20 years ago but
it still should be more or less
compatible shouldn't it so why do you
still need a program like say dosbox to
run your old games well yes we did give
an overview of various reasons why new
pcs often cannot run old games in this
video right now let's dig a little bit
deeper and talk about why ostensibly
compatible hardware can still require
emulators you see back in the day most
computers use 16-bit architectures both
for their cpus and operating systems
meaning that they handle data in 16-bit
chunks and could address 2 to the 16th
bytes of memory so 64 kilobytes this
obviously
wasn't very much so later on processors
like the intel 386 introduced 32-bit
computing where systems could handle up
to four gigabytes of memory however
running old 16-bit software required a
bit more work as the transition to the
32-bit era introduced a couple of
significant problems for older programs
one was that programs written for one
architecture can't natively run on
another that is a program written for a
16-bit system can't run on a 32-bit
system without some tweaking the other
was that many 16-bit dos applications
ran in a processor mode called real mode
which allowed any program to access any
portion of memory space including
portions of memory being used by other
programs this obviously meant that real
mode had
real security and stability issues as
there were no checks in place to make
sure that a malicious or misbehaving
program wouldn't get into other parts of
the memory and threaten data or take
down the system so a new processor mode
called protected mode became the norm in
the mid-1980s which isolated memory
spaces from each other and gave programs
different privileged levels to prevent
programs that weren't device drivers or
the operating system from executing
certain instructions however lots of
older programs could only operate in
real mode so combined with the 16 to
32-bit transition 16-bit real mode had
to be virtualized to a special mode
called virtual 8086 mode that set up a
virtual real mode
and yes that's definitely an oxymoron
it set it up by emulating an entire old
school 8086 processor for a long time
having this capability was viewed as
essential due to how common 16-bit
programs were even in versions of
windows based on windows nt which didn't
run on top of dos a built-in emulator
called ntvdm allowed old-school dos
programs to run
ntvdm is present or can at least be
installed in every 32-bit version of
windows nt including windows 10. however
ntd vm has its own issues such as low
refresh rates poor audio support and an
inability to slow down modern cpus which
can make games run way too fast but this
still doesn't explain why old-school dos
games often won't run at all on new
systems the issue is that nowadays most
systems are shipping with 64-bit
operating systems rather than 32-bit
primarily because they can support more
than 4 gigabytes of memory however
running a 64-bit os requires an entirely
new processing mode called
long mode which would have required
microsoft to build a whole new piece of
software to virtualized a 16-bit
environment for running really old
programs and while 16-bit programs were
still important when 32-bit computing
became popular back when we were all
using operating systems like windows 95
they're basically considered obsolete in
the modern era so microsoft simply did
not bother re-engineering a built-in
emulator therefore 64-bit versions of
windows simply cannot run old dos
programs natively so this is why if you
want to play old dos games on your fancy
new pc you'll probably need a
third-party emulator like dosbox that's
had a lot more work put into it with
game support being a particular focus
making it a superior solution to ntvdm
and what's more
it's free it's amazing how resourceful
the gaming community can be when they're
really determined to do something now if
you'll excuse me i've got a copy of the
original doom that's calling my name
thanks to drop.com for sponsoring this
video with their massdrop cross hifiman
he 4xx planar magnetic headphones hi-fi
man was established in 2007 in new york
and is known for its driver technology
that delivers amazing audio at an
affordable price the sound is smooth
engaging and even across the frequency
range with airy sparkly highs and planar
bass that slams and these things are
comfortable with the focus a hybrid ear
pads that offer extra cushioning which
is covered by a soft luxurious velour
they're an open back design so you can
still hear what's happening around you
and they sound just so wide check them
out at the link below as it's now 130
instead of 180. join the drop today so
thanks for watching guys like subscribe
and be sure to hit us up in the comments
with your own suggestions for what
videos we should cover in the future